Jack Kelliher 21152904 Ethical Reflection.

When implementing autonomous vehicles, there is a range of ethical considerations, which to evaluate require a careful examination of ethical frameworks and professional codes of conduct that guide the development and deployment of new technologies.

While autonomous vehicles promise to enhance safety, increase efficiency and improve accessibility, taking advantage of this opportunity necessitates that we answer important ethical questions. For example, if the promise of safety hinges on the reliability of the AI that controls the vehicles, if the autonomous vehicle causes an accident, who may be held responsible? Some blame must no doubt be placed on the professionals involved in the vehicle/AI systems design, but how much responsibility do they bear if they have followed ethical guidelines? To what degree should they be held liable? These questions show how we must be ready to adapt our understanding of responsibility and liability - this will only become even more important in the future when we consider how preexisting AIs might be involved in the development of new ones.
One of the significant risks associated with the implementation of autonomous vehicles as they become more prevalent, may be significant changes in the job market, which if society is not prepared, could result in many negative consequences. This risk raises ethical questions about the societal responsibility of mitigating the negative impacts of our innovations, aligning with the IEEE's Code of Ethics, which highlights the importance of prioritizing safety and avoiding conflicts of interest. This begs the question, even if the technology is ready, should it be released if society isn't?
Autonomous Vehicles are heavily reliant on data, including the personal and location data of users. This raises privacy concerns and necessitates secure data protection measures. It also poses questions about consent, and whether users even understand how their data is being used, reflecting the ACM's emphasis on respecting privacy. These codes can serve as a guiding framework for addressing the ethical issues arising from the implementation of autonomous vehicles.
As we navigate these new developments, it's vital that we adhere to professional codes of ethics and strive for solutions that maximize benefits while minimizing harm. The ethical quandaries involved in the implementation of autonomous vehicles are a testament to the broader implications of technological advancements and the responsibility we bear in shaping a positive future.